When I look at our societies, there seems to be a kind of anguish rippling through them. Broken dreams, shattered expectations, lost possibilities. Is a happy life — much less a fulfilled one — even possible in times like these?

It’s a profound understatement to say: it’s not easy living through times like these. It’s truer to say: we [live in abusive societies](https://eand.co/what-it-means-to-live-in-an-abusive-society-and-why-we-do-4d57df2ca2de). The abuse of power, of values like decency and truth and purpose, of each other, and of ourselves has become dismal, gruesome normality. We have to begin protecting ourselves from all that, to become mature, healthy people, to can retain our sanity and our humanity, instead of being consumed by despair and fatalism and anger.

So here are a few tips.

**It’s not your fault.** That life is so tough. That things didn’t work out according to plan. That reality didn’t live up to your expectations. The problem is not your plans, expectations, dreams, or aspirations. They are noble things and you must retain them — we’ll come back to that. The point is that it’s not your fault. You have been let down, in ways you never should have been. You have been neglected, in ways that genuinely hurt and endure. Your possibilities shrank not because of something you did, or didn’t do — but for a much, much bigger reason. It was beyond your control, and therefore, the fault is not yours whatsoever.

**You didn’t fail. Society failed _you_**. The most common sentiment I hear these days is a feeling that one has failed. I failed at my career, my relationships, my job. Listen. You didn’t fail. Society failed you. These are two very different things. You might have put your heart into it — or maybe you felt defeated long before that. It doesn’t matter. Society is the actor at fault here. Just like a neglectful parent, or a harmful one, it [failed to nourish and nurture you](https://eand.co/the-exploitation-economy-c97873d1facb) in ways that it should have. You are just like a child who has been abused by a parent — [yes, really](https://eand.co/what-it-means-to-live-in-an-abusive-society-and-why-we-do-4d57df2ca2de?source=your_stories_page-------------------------------------). Only in this case, the figure who should have supported you is an abusive society.

**Don’t internalize what a failed society is**. Don’t bear the burden of social collapse. By that, I mean something like this: it’s easy to blame yourself. But these failings aren’t yours. It’s easy to internalize the failings of a society that literally fails to provide healthcare, retirement, education, chances, opportunities, safety, stability — and say, “well, I was weak, I was dumb, I wasn’t strong enough. I wasn’t tough enough.” Now you’ve internalized — literally — what a society failed to do. But you could never have provided yourself any of these things. Could you have provided your own healthcare? Education? Financial system? Come now. Maybe in the Stone Age. In the modern age, nobody can have built a…hospital or a university. This wasn’t your job. Society’s job was to parent you, to support you in this way — your whole life long — and it failed at that. Don’t internalize its failings.

You’ll know if you are, by the way, if that self-blame has curdled into self-hate. If it’s blackened into depression. If you never feel good enough anymore, around your friends and loved ones. If you constantly feel a sense of desolation and littleness. These are almost sure signs you’re blaming yourself for what a failed society is. Maybe you did lose that job, and it’s secondary effect was to poison your relationship, and the effect of that was to plunge you into depression. None of that was really your fault.

(If you don’t believe it, consider the statistics. Nobody — nobody — can live a decent life on an average income. It’s flatly impossible now. [70% of people live paycheck to paycheck](https://www.forbes.com/sites/zackfriedman/2019/01/11/live-paycheck-to-paycheck-government-shutdown/?sh=ded18024f10b). 80% can’t [raise a small amount](https://www.cnbc.com/2020/12/11/majority-of-americans-are-living-paycheck-to-paycheck-since-covid-hit.html) for an emergency. _These bad feelings are not your fault_. Nobody can be expected to win — maybe even just to survive — a game of football played a minefield. Take a breath, and really feel think about all that for a second. Feel a little lighter yet?)

**You must begin to regard yourself as a being of inalienable, intrinsic worth.** What does it mean to say that “you were failed”? It means that you were born with a certain intrinsic worth, which nobody should have ever taken away from you. Your body is inviolable — yet maybe you don’t have decent healthcare. Your mind is a treasure — yet maybe you never received a good education. Your feelings are things of great meaning and beauty and purpose — yet maybe they were never seen or valued or known at all. All those are concrete ways you were failed — as a being of intrinsic worth.

**You must regard everyone as a being of inalienable, intrinsic worth.**This is the first really big step. You are a being of worth. But _so is everyone else_. That is precisely why everyone deserves things like healthcare, education, medicine, safety, stability and so on. It’s not just you. To really become a mature person, you must think of not just yourself as deserving of these things — but everyone, which, of course, includes you. That is what it means to be treated like a human being. That is what it means to have “humanity” — a terms we too often don’t really understand.

**You don’t have to be perfect to deserve to be treated like a human being.** The catch is that our current culture tells us to lionize ourselves as “perfect just the way we are.” That is not what I am saying to you. You are not perfect. You are deeply imperfect. So am I. Maybe, like me, you have certain weaknesses you can’t resist — mine are chocolate, disco, a sneaky cigarette, movie marathons instead of work, and a day spent taking a long walk across the city. Those weaknesses don’t make you unworthy of being treated like a human being. What does? _Nothing does_. There is nothing you can do or say or think or want or need — ever, period — that will ever take away your intrinsic worth. That is why it is inalienable. You deserve certain things just you are a human being. You always have, and always will. You didn’t get them. Your life didn’t go according to plan as a result. But that doesn’t mean you have to be perfect, or ever had to be.

Now, this sounds easy. But in practice, it’s very, very hard. It takes work. Reflection, soul-searching, meditation. To stop blaming yourself. To stop shaming yourself. And really understand that you never had to perfect, and still don’t have to be. That it should be OK to be a flawed, imperfect person — and still be treated like a human being. That is a still deeper idea of humanity — and a truer one, too.

**Draw a firm boundary between you from your abusers.** If you understand it’s society that has failed you — then who is “society”? Well, it’s everyone that believes foolish things like you should never have had healthcare or education or retirement or chances or support or safety or stability. Yes, really. Do you know how one of the first things victims of abuse are often told to is to separate themselves from their abusers? You must do exactly the same thing. You see, the more you hear all that — you don’t deserve anything — the harder it will be for you to cultivate a sense of robust, healthy, intrinsic worth.

If you have “friends” who believe you never deserved to be supported…guess what? They were never really your friends, in any genuine way. Yes, really. Go ahead and think it through. You cannot grow if you are surrounded by people like that. You will go on in despair and anxiety and rage and self-hate. Set a firm boundary. Keep them away from you, and you away from them.

(This is another big step — and no, it’s not easy. But it’s necessary. Relationships determine so much of our feelings and thoughts. And we can’t have better ones if we’re trapped in abusive relationships.)

**Maturity is preventing the suffering you yourself have experienced.** What is the growth of a soul, really? When we mature — when we really learn the lessons above — then we come to have one overriding purpose in our lives. To prevent suffering. But not in any random way. To prevent and limit precisely the suffering we ourselves have experienced. This is the mark of a mature soul — and only a mature soul is capable of adult forms of happiness, like fulfillment, meaning, purpose, grace, truth (whereas an infantile one is capable only of pleasure and anger and anxiety and avoidance and clinging.)

Let me give you an example. I have a friend who wants to become a psychiatrist because her mother was deeply mentally ill. She wants to prevent anyone having to go through what she did as a kid, all the pain and suffering she experienced. A little girl, trying — and inevitably failing — to take care a very, very sick mom. They loved each other to bits. But what is the lesson in that love? Love isn’t the absence of suffering — but it is meaning in suffering, purpose to it, grace in it. Now imagine that she becomes a psychiatrist, and spends her life helping little girls and their moms not have to suffer the way she and hers did. What’s that called? It’s called growth, development, nurturance, healing.

What is it called when enough people do something like that? It’s called…progress. How else does human suffering ever really diminish? **The only way that it happens is when we begin to orient our lives towards reducing the suffering in others that we ourselves have experienced.** “It must never happen again,” we say, “I will walk in this direction.”

What have we learned when we do this? We have learned to begin being loving people. Genuinely loving people. Not just people who to a church or mosque and say that they will love others, and then don’t. But people who genuinely care for the possibilities of others around them. If enough of us do that…we don’t have an abusive society anymore. We have a nurturing one, a nourishing one, one that elevates and expands each and every life into its highest and truest self.

**That is the kind of society we should want. But it’s [not easy to get there](https://eand.co/life-in-america-is-scary-but-it-shouldnt-be-752b8b60edc5), from the place we are now.** Not just politically — but psychologically. It’s not easy to build a functioning society — from abused, battered, weary, anxious, frightened, desperate people. `Hurt people hurt people.`

First we must [teach ourselves](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=2ahUKEwiDsvrjxb3wAhVPFlkFHRqDDlMQFjAKegQIAhAD&url=https%3A%2F%2Feand.co%2Fwhat-my-puppy-taught-me-about-saving-the-world-6620dc59b303&usg=AOvVaw3lG8Fy6Xqy_yVCG7aQxcup) how to love again. Step by gentle, faltering, baby step. The forest’s challenge isn’t just outlasting the hurricane. It is placing the seed in the soil. It is reaching for the sun. It is holding up the whole sky. We must learn to see, hold, and touch each other again. That, I feel, is the truest — and hardest — challenge of now.

Umair,May 2021
